The following is excerpted from the question-and-answer section of the transcript.

(Questions from industry analysts are provided in full, but answers are omitted - download the transcript to see the full question-and-answer session)
Question: John Faucher - JPMorgan - Analyst : Good morning. You talked about some of the markets that are doing well and I think where the street is really concerned here is in terms of some of the markets where Russia, Brazil where we think there's potentially a little more macro impact. And given the fact you guys are about four weeks into the quarter can you talk about whether or not you've seen some of these macro shifts have an impact on the consumer and how should we think about those markets going forward? And then a quick question for Hugh which is if we look at this it seems as though if Venezuela is about 3% this year on the run rate basis of earnings you're covering about 50 basis points in Q4, so should we think about the balance coming out through the first three quarters of next year? Thanks. without the prior written consent of Thomson Reuters. 'Thomson Reuters' and the Thomson Reuters logo are registered trademarks of Thomson Reuters and its affiliated companies. OCTOBER 06, 2015 / 12:00PM, PEP - Q3 2015 PepsiCo Inc Earnings Call

Question: Dara Mohsenian - Morgan Stanley - Analyst : So first just a detailed question for Hugh. Do you guys have an extra week in 2016 and if you do how much will that add to EPS? And then the real question I was hoping for an update on the potato chip revenue management program at FLNA. How is it trending so far versus expectations, how's it being received by consumers and your retail partners, and going forward from here should we expect volume growth to improve sequentially or will it really take another couple of quarters before we cycle the program to see sustained volume improvement? Thanks.

Question: Bryan Spillane - BofA Merrill Lynch - Analyst : Good morning everyone. Just I guess two questions related to comments on productivity. I think first if I look at currency or constant currency operating profit growth it's about $700 million of profit this year. So could you just give us some context in terms of how much of that profit growth has come from productivity dropping, how much of is just a natural leverage in the business and maybe some context in terms of rate of reinvestment this year.

Question: Caroline Levy - CLSA Limited - Analyst : Thanks so much. Good morning. I wonder if you could just take us through the US beverage environment in a little bit more detail, talking about how carbonated soft drinks are doing particularly diet versus specifics on you mentioned how strong tea is and how that shift in categories affect margins going forward?

Question: Judy Hong - Goldman Sachs - Analyst : Thank you, good morning everyone. So Indra you talked about the focus on increasing the promotional spending effectiveness as part of the productivity initiatives. I was hoping to get a little bit more color just in terms of where do you think PepsiCo is in the context of what the industry is doing. We've been hearing this trade spend effectiveness programs for a while, so how is it different this time? Is it more evolutionary versus revolutionary? And then some of the categories that you think are right for this to continue within your portfolio. And then Hugh just on a follow-up on Venezuela. So it seems like Venezuela probably added about 1 to 2 points to revenue growth. So just can you clarify or quantify the revenue impact? And then in the fourth quarter as you deconsolidate Venezuela, how much of the organic revenue growth is that risk in terms of taking that out of your P&L? without the prior written consent of Thomson Reuters. 'Thomson Reuters' and the Thomson Reuters logo are registered trademarks of Thomson Reuters and its affiliated companies. OCTOBER 06, 2015 / 12:00PM, PEP - Q3 2015 PepsiCo Inc Earnings Call

Question: Vivien Azer - Cowen and Company - Analyst : Hi, good morning. My question has to do with your European segment and specifically your beverage volumes. I recognize that you're lapping a slightly easier compare. But it does look like your volumes inflected nicely so I was hoping you could offer some color on the drivers of that. Thank you.

Question: Ali Dibadj - Bernstein - Analyst : Hi, so I have two basic questions for you. One is when you look at the organic sales numbers there seems to be two things that are a little unexpected or weird. One is obviously that 33% Latin America pricing number and the second is the strong 3% volumes in NAB. So on the former can you just give us a little bit more detail about where that comes from? Was that really all Venezuela, how much was Argentina and when you deconsolidate Venezuela what does that pricing specifically number look like if Venezuela isn't in there? On the NAB good volume numbers it sounds like a lot of that was stills. Can you give us a breakdown on volume growth between stills and CSDs? So that's question one. The second question --

Question: Ali Dibadj - Bernstein - Analyst : Okay, so super helpful on that one. In terms of the second question I'd love to hear how you guys are thinking about the potential implications of ABI SAB to the PepsiCo business. So PepsiCo obviously including the Brazil bottling what might happen there, how you guys are thinking about that in terms of your joint purchasing with ABI? This is no longer kind of rumor, speculation, so you guys have clearly done as you usually do good analytics, good math on thinking through the implications here for you guys. without the prior written consent of Thomson Reuters. 'Thomson Reuters' and the Thomson Reuters logo are registered trademarks of Thomson Reuters and its affiliated companies. OCTOBER 06, 2015 / 12:00PM, PEP - Q3 2015 PepsiCo Inc Earnings Call

Question: Bill Schmitz - Deutsche Bank - Analyst : Hi, good morning. A couple of questions on the US just to drill a little deeper on some previous questions. Do you still think the US bottling assets are strategic long-term assets? And how far are you from having them fully optimized?

Question: Kevin Grundy - Jefferies LLC - Analyst : Good morning. Indra, so my question to come back to North America beverages, specifically carbonated soft drinks. So profit growth in NAB has been outstanding this year. From a marketshare perspective, Indra you've often spoken in the past about managing that market share within a corridor. And as I look at the Nielsen data it looks like you guys have been losing share within CSDs not just on a four week, 12 week but over the past year. without the prior written consent of Thomson Reuters. 'Thomson Reuters' and the Thomson Reuters logo are registered trademarks of Thomson Reuters and its affiliated companies. OCTOBER 06, 2015 / 12:00PM, PEP - Q3 2015 PepsiCo Inc Earnings Call And I'm just curious, number one if you're comfortable with the share position now or if at some point more investment is needed here whether that's innovation, whether this is trade spend, etc. So any comments there with respect to your carbonated soft drink trends here would be helpful. Thank you.

Question: Bill Marshall - Barclays Capital - Analyst : Good morning. Thank you. Your last comment notwithstanding I do you have a question on carbonated soft drinks. Just from a qualitative perspective obviously you've made the switch to aspartame free on diet Pepsi. So I'm just curious what the consumer reaction has been to the move? And then broadening that out into other sweetener technology and you've used Stevia in some cases, just where we should look at how this is developing and how the consumer is reacting to these new products? Thank you.

Question: Steve Powers - UBS - Analyst : Thanks. Good morning. So Frito-Lay volumes were a bit better than I think some investors feared they might be just based on some of the scanner data trends. So is there any light you can shine on that related to maybe sell-in versus sell-out timing or strength in outside the track channels, for example foodservice, that's my first question. Then Indra, longer-term, picking up on your commentary surrounding productivity as you look forward over the next four years of your current program, how do you see that balance between efficiency and effectiveness contributing for the next $4 billion? Is it split, is it skewed one way or another? And then within the efficiency bucket do the drivers remain supply chain restructuring and Smart Spending or are there other initiatives on the horizon that we should be thinking about? Thanks.

Table Of Contents
PepsiCo Inc Q1 2016 Earnings Call Summary – 2016-04-18 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Brief of PEP earnings conference call or presentation 18-Apr-16 12:00pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc at Consumer Analyst Group of New York Conference Transcript – 2016-02-18 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Transcript of PEP presentation 18-Feb-16 6:45pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc Q4 2015 Earnings Call Summary – 2016-02-11 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Brief of PEP earnings conference call or presentation 11-Feb-16 1:00pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc Q4 2015 Earnings Call Transcript – 2016-02-11 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Transcript of PEP earnings conference call or presentation 11-Feb-16 1:00pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc Q3 2015 Earnings Call Transcript – 2015-10-06 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Transcript of PEP earnings conference call or presentation 6-Oct-15 12:00pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc at Barclays Global Consumer Staples Conference Transcript – 2015-09-09 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Transcript of PEP presentation 9-Sep-15 12:15pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc Q2 2015 Earnings Call Summary – 2015-07-09 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Brief of PEP earnings conference call or presentation 9-Jul-15 12:00pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc Q2 2015 Earnings Call Transcript – 2015-07-09 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Transcript of PEP earnings conference call or presentation 9-Jul-15 12:00pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc Annual Shareholders Meeting Transcript – 2015-05-06 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Transcript of PEP shareholder or annual meeting 6-May-15 1:00pm GMT

PepsiCo Inc Q1 2015 Earnings Call Summary – 2015-04-23 – US$ 54.00 – Edited Brief of PEP earnings conference call or presentation 23-Apr-15 12:00pm GMT