Thanks to chips and dip, Pepsico saw an uptick in revenue in 2017.

The snack food and beverage giant reported a 1.2% increase in revenue for the full year, though growth was flat in the quarter that ended Dec. 30.

That three month period also posted a 50 cents loss in earnings per share as compared to a 97 cent increase during that period in 2016. The loss was due in part to a $2.5 billion tax expense in the wake of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.    

In North America, sales chips and dip led to Frito Lay reporting a 5% spike in growth, while Quaker Foods North America saw sales of hot cereals, cereal bars, and ready to eat mixes increase by the mid single digits. 


More:PepsiCo delivers ultimate lip-synch rap battle for Super Bowl ad

More:"Lady Doritos"? It's not happening, PepsiCo says

More:Fizz quiz: What's the hottest new thing in soft drinks?

"We met or exceeded most of the financial goals we set out at the beginning of the year,'' CEO Indra Nooyi. said in a statement. "We delivered these results in
the midst of a dynamic retail environment and rapidly shifting consumer landscape.”


In the previous quarter, Pepsico said it stumbled by focusing too much on its lower-calorie drinks to woo an increasingly health-conscious public. The company said then that it would shift back toward promoting its brand staples like Pepsi and Mountain Dew, though it would continue expanding its menu.

While North American beverage sales were stronger in the last few months of 2017, Nooyi said in an earnings call with investors Tuesday that  there was still "tremendous room to improve.''   



This year, the company will heavily promote new beverages such as Mountain Dew Ice, and its new sparkling water, Bubly. In the wake of the federal tax act, the company says it will increase training and offer a bonus of up to $1,000 to full time, front-line employees. It will also return $7 billion to investors -- a combination of share repurchases and an increase to the dividend. 